The meter begins to kick in. It means we've begun to
record. It's essentially identification by
name. Identification by name and your
affiliation with Woods Hole. Okay. It's your
turn. I'm H. Burr Steinbach. Henry is the name,
part of the first initial. Henry Burr Steinbach,
commonly known as Burr. I have been associated
with Woods Hole Oceanographic and with
oceanography. really for only about six or eight
years. I became the first dean of the graduate
school of oceanography, and following after six
months in which K.O. Emery really set the thing up
in good shape. That's been my primary experience,
except for a whole series of committees.
What was your early academic training? Early
academic training was essentially basic biology
and general physiology. And where did you go to
school? Undergraduate at Michigan, master's
degree at Brown University, Ph.D. at the
University of Pennsylvania, and a couple years of
post-doc work.
Somehow I have you identified more with medical
school, in my mind. Is that incorrect?
Professional jobs have always been with
departments of biology and zoology. But I've been
closely affiliated with medical schools and
taught in medical schools during the war. A field
of teaching there was physiology. In my
professional field, it would be called
biophysics. And biophysics. And how did you
develop an interest in oceanography or becoming
dean of Woods Hole? partly because I've been
associated with the Woodsville community since
1929, which is a long time away, and witnessed the
growth of the oceanography here. And then some
years ago, dates I'd have to get you from the
record, some years ago it was decided that it was
necessary in the old interagency committee on
oceanography to have some general biologists
associated with it. So I became a member of the
advisory committee for the old ICO.
How were you chosen for the ICO? As you know, the way
in which one gets into these things. I had been I'd
been mixed up with the medical field on the
National Heart Council, and then I also was
chairman of the Division of Biology and
Agriculture of the National Research Council.
And that, in turn, led me to association with the
conferences that the National Academy would have
up here at Woods Hole. And being involved in those
conferences, I got rather well acquainted with
such people as Jim Wakeland, who at that time was
Assistant Secretary of the Navy. and Edward Wink,
who became very firmly involved, of course, in the
development of governmental support of
oceanography. So it's another one of those
instances that is your personal acquaintances
and development of interest in the field by
association with these people. Were you happy
with the functioning of ICO? Very much so. I think
they did a great deal of good at that time. even
though it didn't lead to any of the legislation
that we would occasionally recommend.
What seemed to be the breakdown between the ICO and
legislation?
Well, the structure of the ICO really was the
assigned leadership of the various branches of
the government, and they had no power.
In other words, there'd be meetings, there'd be
recommendations, it would be a device for all of
the different agencies to know what was going on.
But each agency still did as it pleased, so that it
had no basic structure other than that of
information and advisory. But I think it had a very
good influence in that effect. With whom did you
serve on the ICO?
Let me rephrase the question, please. Was there
anyone with whom you were particularly impressed
with in serving on the ICO? Well, yes, indeed, they
had some remarkable oceanographers. Morris
Ewing, for example, was on that. That's where I got
well acquainted with Morris Ewing. Brackett
Hersey from here was a member of it. Hank Arnold,
who is now running the State Department of
Science. And the things, they were quite a series
of people, extraordinarily able people, as you
might say. which always gave me a feeling of slight
bemusement because here I was, essentially a
medical biophysicist operating with these
characters who really were the basis for modern
oceanography. What was Morris Ewing like in
committee assignments?
Very intelligent, very innovative, and very, you
might say, very personal in the sense that he
didn't want anyone else to run him. I still
remember him getting up at one of the meetings and
essentially saying, why doesn't the damn Navy
support our boat and keep their fingers off the
boat? We know how to run it. Morris was one of the
great people of oceanography. There's just no
doubt about it. But he was absolutely devoted to
going ahead and doing what he, with his large quota
of friends decided were the proper things to do in
oceanography. He had a great influence on the
development of oceanography. But as a committee
member, he was also great because you could always
rely on him to express his opinion. Were there any
particular recommendations coming out of ICO
which you supported strongly, which were not
developed?
It's a little hard to remember. That was quite some
years ago. We did put in a very strong plug for the
assumption by the government of the total costs of
oceanographic surveys because many of the
oceanographers of course are working on specific
problems the contours of the bottom of the ocean or
the effects of the currents or the distribution of
the benthic organisms and things like that And
they're somewhat less interested in taking
worldwide surveys of the total oceans. And at that
time, there was no such thing as the DOE in the,
well, it was before the
geophysical year, whatever it was called. I
forgot. International geophysical year. So it
seemed highly important that there be a
concentrated effort for the federal government
to take over the responsibility of making sure
that there were these ocean-wide surveys. Now,
that was not acted upon at that time. But as you
know, there had been a series of developments,
mostly, well, some national, quite a few of them
international. And how much those developments
stemmed from the discussions and
recommendations of ICO would be very hard to
define. But the recommendations were there, and
they probably had an influence. After your
service on the committee, then what did you do?
Well, I was briefly on the NASCO committee, but I
resigned from that. Actually, that overlapped
with ICO, and I resigned from that because I went in
and informed them. I thought there was a little
conflict of interest there because they were
criticizing the ICO operations, and I was being an
ardent supporter of ICO. Then at the time when the
Council on Marine Science and Development that
was the government equivalent of the Stratton
Commission. And Ed Wink was in charge of that. So he
brought me in as consultant on that for two or three
years. That was also a very exciting thing because
Ed Wink was also quite a personality, as you
probably know in case you've interviewed him. And
then also at just about that time, Sea Grant
program was started. And since I had worked very
closely with Bob Abel on the old ICO thing, and also
had been an assistant director of the National
Science Foundation, a few things like that, I
became one of the first members of the Sea Grant
Advisory Program. So there's a continuity. I have
several questions.
Probably working backwards. In working with
Wink, what exactly were you trying to do? Well, the
Council had the overall responsibility for the
coordination and development of all marine
sciences. So that what we would do, we would have,
among other things, a series of committee
meetings to... put out the annual reports that
were necessary and were required. And, of course,
those reports, I don't know, you can never tell how
much influence they had, but after all, the
chairman of this council was by... By law, the vice
president of the United States, and Humphrey at
that time, was extraordinarily interested in
marine sciences. So the main thing that we did,
that his advisory group did, was to put together
the progress for a given year to provide the
material to write the report. And as a matter of
fact, I was involved with Ed frequently the final
hectic moments when you had to get the damn report
out. So that's it. And you'll find the reports, of
course, have been written, and you'll see their
recommendations. And this is all being done
parallel with, I might say, the NASCO committee
reports and several other National Academy of
Sciences reports and a follow-on from the ICO.
There's a continuity between them.
Did you feel as if when Humphrey left, that sort of
the drive for oceanography left with him? Oh,
Christ, not only left, it disappeared. I wasn't at
the meeting, but because the advisory committee
meeting did not meet with the council. They were
advisory to the director of the thing. But the
story is that when Agnew came into office, that he
attended one meeting, part of it, and left and came
back the second meeting and stayed five minutes
and got up and said, sorry, gentlemen, I'm
interested in space. And bang! Shortly after
that, the council did expire.
Sea Grant. Now, second question. When did you
become interested in the idea of Sea Grant? When
did you first hear about it? Well, I've been fairly
close associated with Athol Spilhaus, you see.
Because I taught at Minnesota when Athol was dean
of the technology out there. And you don't be
associated with Athol Spilhaus without knowing
an awful lot of things that he's thinking about. So
that I would say practically from when he first
invented the term. And liked the idea very much, I
might say. You liked the idea? Oh, yes. What was
Spilhaus like to work for? There have been some
criticisms of him as dean in Minnesota.
That would require another whole book to write
about Raphael Spilhaus. He's a most remarkable
person. He has an ability to define objectives.
And he also has the ability to point fingers at
people and say, get ahead, go do it. So that some of
the, I suspect that some of the flack at Minnesota
was primarily because he was not one to just sit
behind a desk and be an orderly operator. He is a man
of ideas, he develops ideas, and he does have a
considerable ability to get people to go do the
work for him.
Oh yes, I'm sure you couldn't possibly work with,
Spilhaus couldn't possibly work in an
institution not to get some criticism, but the
praise would exceed it with criticism. When
Spilhaus first begins to talk to you about Sea
Grant, you remember what terms he phrased it? Did
he attach it immediately to land-grant colleges?
He did it by comparison. That was I wouldn't want to
say that that's what stimulated his thinking on
it, but being a good political thinker, I think he
realized that a handle that would be recognized by
people, including the legislators, would be this
comparison with a land grant. You have a land
grant, so okay, damn it, let's have a sea grant,
which is just important. I suspect that was the
reasoning.
The use of the term Sea Grant program was almost
certainly suggested by the existence of land
grant. But I don't think that it was the, I might
say, the success or an existence of land grant that
led into the concept that we ought to really start
developing programs for the proper and effective
utilization of marine resources.
Now, when you first began to be associated with Sea
Grant, what were the problems involved in
originating Sea Grant and picking Sea Grant
institutions? Well,
the problems involved were, they rested upon the,
a little bit on the Land Grant Association, that
you would make use of academic institutions. And
since the philosophy of Sea Grant, in the same way
that Land Grant is, that this be a system in which
you really try to improve the utilization of
something. In other words, it becomes what some
people call applied science. And introducing
that into departments of biology or departments
of chemistry or departments of whatever in the
academic institution is extraordinarily
difficult, because they are convinced that their
main function in life is to follow what they then
consider the basic problems in a particular
field. And Sea Grant is pretty pervasive. If you
make use of the total resources of the oceans, you
can't just be a biologist, or you can't just be a
chemist, or you can't be what else. You have to be
what ecology ought to be, but this wasn't at that
time. You have to be a little of everything. In
other words, you have to be able to define rather
broad problems that lead to a practical usage
right away.
You're associated almost immediately with Bob
Abel, I take it. Oh, yes. And I had been associated.
See, he was the ICO when I was working there. Ed Link
was with the PSAC.
Jim Wakeland,
as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, was in charge
of ICO. And Bob Abel, being with the Navy at that
time, was essentially the director for Wakeland.
That is, Wakeland's appointee as director of Sea
Grant. So I worked with Bob Abel. I'd worked with
him for quite some time. He's with us now at A&M.
Don't I know
it. I take it you found him efficient and those
sorts of things which make a good administrator?
Oh, very. He also had a remarkable knack of finding
some excellent people to work with him. And the Sea
Grant staff is pretty remarkable in that respect.
When you first begin to designate Sea Grant
colleges, how do you go about designating them?
Well, the first thing that, of course, it became
known that there was Sea Grant money and various
colleges put in. And that's where the first
successful Sea Grant program really was the
Oregon State University. For some reason or
other, Sorry, I can't remember the name of the guy.
Wayne Burke? Hmm? Wayne Burke? I don't think Wayne
Burke. There are a couple of people out there who
grasp the concept right away on the thing. But with
most of the other schools that we first started
doing things with, it was a very hard job to get them
to agree to the concept of Sea Grant. And the way in
which that was done was not only that Bob Abel and
his staff were excluding Abel people, but they
also used their advisory committee. They'd go out
and have meetings at the end of the advisory
committee. Bob Abel and usually two or three of the
advisory committee would go up and talk with the
boss man of the university and once in a while have
to pound the table and say, either you can persuade
your departmental people to agree to this
concept, or you better not even try to get into Sea
Grant.
I would say that the first five years, there was one
really of educating the academic institutions to
subscribe to the concept of Sea Grant. And of
course, John Calhoun was very early in that. And he
was also one of the first members of the Sea Grant
Advisory Program. But then he resigned when he
when it was quite clear that A&M was going to be a
leader in Sea Grant, too. But he's been very
influential in general advisory work, too. Have
you been satisfied with the outcome of Sea Grant?
Yes. For the first 10-year development, I think it
was excellent. I think that the next 10 years is...
It's really, in a sense, more challenging, and
that is to how to meld it together into much more of a
national program. You've got the parts now. You
have the various units of a program. Now to define
more nearly some of the national objectives and to
get a more concerted effort on those.
After Sea Grant, then what? After Sea Grant, what
do you mean after Sea Grant? What did you do next?
Oh, of course they just kicked me off the Sea Grant
Advisory Panel. Coincidence with that, I got to
retirement age at the University of Chicago. So I
moved here to Woods Hole and became a president and
director of MBL on a sort of an interim basis
because I was getting a little too old to do that.
But there was an overlap of time here. In other
words, I had revamped the Department of Chicago
and brought in zoology and botany together in
biology, which was a good time for me to get out of
the chairmanship there. So rather than waiting to
age 65, I guess I was 63, I came here then to take over
running a marine biological laboratory. But they
also have a stipulation that at age 65 you retire.
So after the two and, well, three years of running
it, really, we were developing the graduate
program at Woods Hole Oceanographic. And I was
very interested in that. because it's part of
Woods Hole life. And I'm not institution-minded,
should we say. I love Woods Hole as a basic
community. So when they were having great
difficulty in finding a professional
oceanographer who would sort of run a chance on
trying to put together a graduate school, and with
a general academic background, they finally, we
finally reached an agreement, okay, I'd start the
graduate school up there. So that's sort of the
sequence of things overlapping. First,
working with the lab, did you go to the lab with any
preconceived ideas of what you wanted to do? Which
lab? The MBL. Well, it's been a major source of my
research work, of course. Well, to pick an
example, I was one of the first ones to start using
the giant squid axon as a device for really medical
physiology and things like that. And that's been
mostly my existence there. So to say the
involvement with the administrative end of
things and the overall planning of things didn't
take place until about age 55. Before that, I
really was an academic. laboratory type, you
might say.
You worked with the squid, though, for G, you know,
I guess 20 years almost, didn't you? No, not that
long, because my interest was really, say,
biophysics, and had to do with particularly
electrolyte transfer between cells in the
environment. So it's quite a spread of materials
that I used, ranging pretty much from frog skin,
muscle tissue, some kidney work, things like
that. So at that time, I was being a very good
academic. In other words, you have an objective
and use the material that's best. And squid
nerves, of course, turned out to be one of the most
remarkable findings.
You didn't carry out any major reorganization of
the lab when you arrived? At the MBL? Yeah, at the
MBL. No, except that while I was there, we did start
some of the year-round programs. You see, the MBL
had always been really primarily a summer
program. It became perfectly clear that one
needed to get more year-round programs going for
for a very practical reason, and that is that
people would come to, we'd ask foundations for
support, and they'd come and look at all those nice
buildings there and find them used only four
months out of the year, and they'd just get into all
sorts of tizzies. So for a purely practical
reason, it became necessary to try to begin to
bring more outside things in, which my successor,
Jim Ebert, has been remarkably successful at
doing. But during the... During the three or four
years in which I was director of the NBL, we did
start that year-round program. How did you aim for
a year-round program? What sort of changes did you
make to create one? No changes, in effect. It's
primarily a matter of finding ways to do it, which
means money.
That just had to do with interesting various
units. One of the main things that we started then
was this Boston University program, which is
working very well.
In a sense, that wasn't so much a matter of money as
it was getting some very good people working here
year-round who could pay for themselves. And how
did you solicit them?
Again, that has a rather odd history. At the time
that I was the assistant director of the Science
Foundation. This goes way back to, what, 53. And
then following that, I was chairman of the
divisional committee. And at that time, some of
the people at Boston University wanted to start
their own marine laboratory. And the problems of
financing to really establish a proper marine
laboratory were not very good. During the various
discussions, which lasted over several years,
you see, really quite a few years, I became
acquainted with some of the people at Boston
University, and we finally arrived at the
conclusion that the sensible thing, if they
wanted a marine sciences program, would be to
utilize an existing facility. That's roughly the
way in which it developed. Okay. And so then when
you become director, I suppose you... Didn't make
overtures to them to use the facilities? Yes, it
was one of those things that,
again, I'm trying to remember the name of the man
mainly involved who left and is now down in South
Carolina. It was mainly a thing that we'd been
having discussions all along. And prior to that,
there was no really easy administrative link at
which you could do the planning. But when I came
into the office and already had the contacts with
Boston University, it wasn't a matter of anyone
making overtures. It was a matter of just saying,
ha, goddammit, now we can get going.
So then you just began to move? Yeah. All right. And
some very interesting administrative
discussions, I might say.
But it led to the formation of, I think, a very good
program now, which also made it much easier. The
existence of that made it much easier to get the
other year-round programs started. You have to
have a nugget to start with, you see.
And it's while you're there, is this when you begin
to make formal contact with now The Woods Hole
staff? No, I'd really known a fairish number of
them for quite some time. Woods Hole is that sort of
a community, even though the institutions are
separate. On the scientific staff basis, no one
makes any separations. Depends on your interest
in science. So the answer is, no, I'd known them
quite a bit. And then, of course, when I became
director and became more closely associated with
Paul Fye, it was,
well, we agreed upon something which is
extraordinarily important and still is, and that
is that Woods Hole is a total scientific
community. And you do have to make sure that even
though the separate institutions retain their
individual integrity, that nevertheless they do
not act competitively. have to act
cooperatively. So Paul and I agreed on that very
thoroughly.
And that led to quite a close association.
And when then do you think about becoming director
or dean over here at Woods Hole? I was involved in
the search committee. Oh, okay. And it really was
one of those cases
It would be very hard to get a top-level
prestigious oceanographer to come in and
run a chance on cutting down his own scientific
productivity to start up something new like that,
you see. So that I don't remember, and I wouldn't
mention anyway, the people, we had two or three
people that we really tried to put the bee on. But if
you're mixed up in academia, you'll know that if
there's a position open and you track a couple
people, then if you go much further than that, the
prestige of the job sort of goes down. It's pretty
clear, and this is my reasoning really, because as
I pointed out to the rest of the search committee, I
had no experience in either oceanography or being
a dean or anything else, so what the hell. But then
we also decided that everyone would give me
complete backing and support. And I didn't really
need those skills. All they needed was someone to
get the balloon thing started. And that's a nice
challenge.